Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Expert Systems With Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa

An adaptive portfolio trading system: A risk-return portfolio
optimization using recurrent reinforcement learning with expected
maximum drawdown
Saud Almahdi, Steve Y. Yang∗
Financial Engineering Program, School of Business, Stevens Institute of Technology, 1 Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 24 March 2017
Revised 29 May 2017
Accepted 14 June 2017
Available online 15 June 2017
Keywords:
Recurrent reinforcement learning
Expected maximum drawdown
Optimal portfolio rebalancing
Downside risk

a b s t r a c t
Dynamic control theory has long been used in solving optimal asset allocation problems, and a number
of trading decision systems based on reinforcement learning methods have been applied in asset allocation and portfolio rebalancing. In this paper, we extend the existing work in recurrent reinforcement
learning (RRL) and build an optimal variable weight portfolio allocation under a coherent downside risk
measure, the expected maximum drawdown, E(MDD). In particular, we propose a recurrent reinforcement learning method, with a coherent risk adjusted performance objective function, the Calmar ratio,
to obtain both buy and sell signals and asset allocation weights. Using a portfolio consisting of the most
frequently traded exchange-traded funds, we show that the expected maximum drawdown risk based
objective function yields superior return performance compared to previously proposed RRL objective
functions (i.e. the Sharpe ratio and the Sterling ratio), and that variable weight RRL long/short portfolios
outperform equal weight RRL long/short portfolios under different transaction cost scenarios. We further
propose an adaptive E(MDD) risk based RRL portfolio rebalancing decision system with a transaction cost
and market condition stop-loss retraining mechanism, and we show that the proposed portfolio trading
system responds to transaction cost effects better and outperforms hedge fund benchmarks consistently.
© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
In ﬁnancial investing, a general goal is to dynamically allocate a
set of assets to maximize the returns over time and minimize risk
simultaneously. For investors it is essential to be able to invest in a
portfolio that can satisfy their preset goals by building an optimal
portfolio initially and subsequently rebalancing it optimally. Portfolio theory began with mean-variance optimization by Markowitz
(1952) where he proposed portfolio selection by maximizing the
expected return while minimizing risk in the form of covariance
matrices. Rebalancing a portfolio re-optimizes the weights of the
portfolio over a predeﬁned time horizon. The application of dynamic asset allocation using dynamic programming methods was
originally introduced by Bertsekas (1995). Due to the curse of dimensionality in dynamic programming, automated self learning algorithms are normally applied by investors and scholars in designing optimal trading strategies instead. The reinforcement learning method is a type of approximate dynamic programming and a

∗

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: salmahdi@stevens.edu (S. Almahdi), steve.yang@stevens.edu,
steve2yang@yahoo.com (S.Y. Yang).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.06.023
0957-4174/© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

subcategory of machine learning introduced by Sutton and Barto
(1998), and has been broadly applied by investors and researchers
in building strategic asset allocation decision systems (Dempster &
Leemans, 2006; Feuerriegel & Prendinger, 2016; Gold, 2003a; Tan,
Quek, & Cheng, 2011).
In this paper, we apply the recurrent reinforcement learning
(RRL) method with a statistically coherent downside risk adjusted
performance objective function to simultaneously generate both
buy/sell signals and optimal asset allocation weights. Moody, Wu,
Liao, and Saffell (1998) introduced recurrent reinforcement learning in building a trading system where they examined the performance effect between using the Sharp ratio vs. several economic
utility functions. They concluded that the Sharpe ratio behaves like
an adaptive utility function, and when maximizing the differential
Sharpe ratio as immediate rewards in an online learning mode, the
Sharpe ratio signiﬁcantly outperforms the ones maximizing proﬁts
directly. Most of the subsequent work (Gold, 2003b; Maringer &
Ramtohul, 2010, 2012; Pu et al., 2016) focused on equally weighted
portfolios. Although both Moody et al. (1998) and Bertoluzzo and
Corazza (2008) mentioned potential drawdown effects on RRL performance, neither thoroughly examined the actual effects.

268

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

Many practitioners tend to adjust the commonly accepted theoretical models to apply them to their particular situations, or
develop measures that focus on their speciﬁc interests. They often neglect the theoretical aspects or assumptions of their adjustments, such as in the safety-ﬁrst risk measures (i.e. the Sharpe
ratio, the Sortino ratio, the Sterling ratio, and the Calmar ratio). Bhansali (2007) and Zimmermann, Drobetz, and Oertmann
(2003) noted that many risk measures based on estimation of
covariance matrices using historical data failed notoriously when
they are needed the most. They agreed that the difference in
volatility and correlations between up and down market environments implies the risk reduction potential is limited leaving
them incapable of foreseeing stress-type events. We argue that
large drawdowns usually lead to fund redemption, and hence they
should lead to very different optimal decisions. In this paper, we
extend the variable weight RRL long only approach by Moody and
Saffell (2001) to a long-short approach and examine the expected
maximum drawdown E(MDD) (Magdon-Ismail & Atiya, 2004) effect on portfolio performance with joint interaction of transaction
costs. Magdon-Ismail, Atiya, Pratap, and Abu-Mostafa (2003) and
Magdon-Ismail and Atiya (2004) provided a statistically coherent
downside risk measure, the Calmar ratio with the expected maximum drawdown, which provides a theoretical base for us to apply
this downside risk measure as a differentiable objective function in
RRL. This E(MDD) based Calmar ratio (Magdon-Ismail et al., 2003)
is distinctly different from the exponential moving average drawdown approach used by Moody and Saffell (2001).
More speciﬁcally, we compare the Calmar ratio1 with the
Sharpe ratio where the risk adjusted measure of performance is
calculated by the standard deviation of the returns over a predeﬁned time horizon. Furthermore, we use the recurrent reinforcement learning method with two different objective functions through which we incorporate different risk considerations.
We show that the recurrent reinforcement learning with variable
weight asset allocation gives a superior performance when applied
to a set of highly liquid exchange-traded funds (ETF) with various
transaction cost considerations over a 5 year period. We also document that when the expected maximum drawdowns are considered, the RRL can generate a superior portfolio to the ones generated by the average deviation performance measure - the Sharpe
ratio. This conﬁrms the intuition that a reasonably low MDD is
critical to the success of any fund.
In addition, we propose a portfolio allocation and rebalancing
system using RRL with E(MDD) as the performance measure, and
this trading system jointly considers transaction costs and market conditions to automatically retrain the system parameters to
achieve better performances. We show that a trading system with
the stop-loss based on market volatility regime is able to make the
portfolio endure higher transaction costs in that the stop-loss strategy will exit the market when the volatility is high and retrain the
parameters of the signal generating process and generate new signals to reenter the market. Such a trading decision system is adaptive to the market conditions and is more resilient to transaction
cost shocks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
review existing work on dynamic portfolio optimization using reinforcement learning methods. We introduce the expected maximum drawdown and its application to RRL in Section 3. We apply
the RRL based portfolio rebalancing approach to a set of ETFs to
compare the cost effect of the Sharpe ratio vs. the Calmar ratio using RRL in Section 4. Section 5 conducts a ﬁnal analysis comparing

1
While there exist multiple deﬁnitions of the Sterling ratio, it measures return
over maximum drawdown-10%, versus the Calmar ratio, which is similar to the Sterling ratio but normally applied to a 3 year period using a maximum drawdown.

the performance of the proposed risk-return portfolio optimization
with that of two hedge fund indices, and Section 6 concludes the
study and identiﬁes some future work.
2. Literature review
Machine learning algorithms are widely used for ﬁnancial market prediction and portfolio constructions, especially for automated
trading strategies. Sutton, Barto, and Williams (1992) ﬁrst introduced the reinforcement learning method (Q-learning) and provided its analytically proven capabilities for one class of adaptive
optimal control problems. Recurrent reinforcement learning was
introduced by Moody et al. (1998) where it was applied to stock
trading as a learning algorithm and they extended a single stock
trading into a long only portfolio optimization method using the
recurrent reinforcement learning where they used the deferential
of the Sharpe ratio as the objective function. In Moody and Saffell (2001) with a direct reinforcement alteration, the authors compared their method with Q-learning and temporal difference algorithms using real data and showed that the deferential Sharpe ratio
recurrent reinforcement learning system outperforms Q-learning.
The researchers also proposed the deferential Sterling ratio as the
performance criterion. However, this version of Sterling ratio neutralizes the downside risk through exponential smoothing.
As a result, a number of trading strategies have been proposed
based on recurrent reinforcement learning methods to address issues such as different asset classes, transaction cost and market
regime change. Gold (2003b) discusses the application of recurrent reinforcement learning in the foreign exchange market and
proposed a two layer network. He compared it with a one layer
network and found that the one layer network outperformed the
two layer network due to noisy ﬁnancial data. Others added different algorithms to the recurrent reinforcement learning. Maringer
and Ramtohul (2010, 2012) added regime switching to the recurrent reinforcement learning where regime switching captures the
different movements of the stock price over time. They added an
additional regime switching model to the recurrent reinforcement
learning to capture the non-linearity of the ﬁnancial market and
proposed two different methods based on the regime switching:
threshold recurrent reinforcement learning (TRRL) in Maringer and
Ramtohul (2010) and the smooth transition recurrent reinforcement learning (STRRL) in Maringer and Ramtohul (2012). The authors compared TRRL and STRRL with RRL and used different transaction costs to show the performance of the models. They concluded that the regime switching recurrent reinforcement learning matches the normal recurrent reinforcement learning in a
dataset having a single regime but it outperforms the RRL when
the dataset has distinctly different regime characteristics.
In addition, another strand of literature combines the recurrent reinforcement learning method with other machine learning
methods, such as genetic programming and neural networks. Pu
et al. (2016) used a genetic algorithm to improve recurrent reinforcement learning for equity trading where the RRL is populationbased and the trading system consists of a group of simulation
traders. The genetic algorithm (GA) is the selector and the recurrent reinforcement learning is the trading system; the goal is to
achieve the optimal combination where the chosen indicators are
exported to the recurrent reinforcement learning trading system.
The authors ﬁnd that the GA-RRL system is more stable than the
buy and hold strategy but it did not outperform the buy and hold
strategy in terms of producing positive Sharpe ratio means. Gorse
(2010) worked on transforming the recurrent reinforcement learning into a stochastic learning process by using the stochastic gradient ascent in the optimization and training technique. This improvement helped the process to be less expensive computationally as there is no need to save the previous signals, but only the

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

t − 1 signal. Hens and Wöhrmann (2007) applied recurrent reinforcement learning on a long-term equity and bond portfolio, assuming a rational investor with a constant risk aversion and a
power utility function. Bertoluzzo and Corazza (2008) developed
an artiﬁcial neural network based on reinforcement learning algorithm using the reciprocal of the returns weighted direction symmetry index as the measure of proﬁtability. They proposed a procedure for the management of drawdown like phenomena, and
concluded that one can take into account a drawdown like phenomenon in the learning process.
In general, most of the current studies on trading decision
systems agree that there are a number of critical components
that need to be considered in developing such systems in addition to the core algorithms. If not adequately designed, these
factors can signiﬁcantly compromise the advantages of any advanced machine learning or artiﬁcial intelligence based trading decision systems. Cavalcante, Brasileiro, Souza, Nobrega, and Oliveira
(2016) surveyed the computational intelligence methods, proposed
to solve ﬁnancial market problems, from 2009 to 2015. They specify a framework to be followed by most computational intelligence
approaches, consisting of the following major components: a) data
preparation (input variables, output variables, acquisition, prepossessing, normalization); b) algorithm deﬁnition (choose model,
conﬁgure architecture); c) training (deﬁne algorithm, adjust parameters, perform training); d) model evaluation (deﬁne metrics,
evaluate accuracy); e) trading strategies; and f) money evaluation. In this survey, the authors note that Chande (2001) identiﬁed three characteristics of successful trading strategies: a) a rule
set deﬁning entering and exiting trades, b) a risk control method,
and c) money management. Other characteristics include taking
into account real world constraints such as backtesting with real
transaction costs and slippage. Martinez, da Hora, Palotti, Meira,
and Pappa (2009) developed a trading system based on forecasting where they used an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) to forecast the asset price, and then designed a trading system specifying
the exit and entry rules based on the forecasts. A stop loss strategy based on placing a threshold on negative returns was also incorporated to accommodate market condition changes. In a paper
by Beraldi, Violi, and De Simone (2011), the authors proposed a
trading support system to help investors solving the strategic asset allocation problem. They focused on the system and its modules and stages rather than the solution method. The modules in
their system included data management, statistical analysis, scenario simulation, a model generator, a solution kernel and a solutions analysis module. Their decision system integrated many
solution approaches based on statistical and stochastic optimization with a Monte Carlo simulation of the scenarios. Eilers, Dunis, von Mettenheim, and Breitner (2014) developed an automated
trading decision system where they combined an artiﬁcial neural
network with reinforcement learning (RL) and seasonality. The authors trained the ANN using the value iteration method of the RL
while only optimizing the immediate reward. This method simpliﬁes the optimal value function to be only the immediate reward.
The three layers include input neurons, hidden neurons, and one
output neuron; and the feed-forward ANN is trained by minimizing the mean squared error using the back-propagation algorithm.
Feuerriegel and Prendinger (2016) proposed a trading system based
on news disclosures where the authors design trading strategies
that utilize textual news to obtain proﬁts on the basis of novel information entering the market. They developed a system for automated decision making using supervised and reinforcement learning. The system contained two main components: news sentiment
extraction and trading strategy execution. They concluded that a
trading system can be improved with additional novel market information.

269

Fig. 1. Recurrent reinforcement learning with portfolio allocation signals.

3. Data and methodology
3.1. Methodology
In this paper, we use the recurrent reinforcement method in
portfolio optimization with different risk considerations through
two objective functions. Following Moody et al. (1998), we use the
differential Sharpe ratio for dynamic optimization of trading system performance. We use performance functions both to increase
the convergence of the learning process and to adapt to changing
market conditions during live trading (see Fig. 1). During this process, the parameter updates can be done during each forward pass
through the training data, and the inﬂuence of the performance
measure can be computed at any time point. We also assume a
small or medium investor who can take ﬁxed or variable sizes of
shares of each asset with no price impact in the market but with
a ﬁxed transaction cost.

Ft = tanh(xt θ )

(1)

Before describing the recurrent reinforcement learning approach, we start by comparing the different safety-ﬁrst risk measures (i.e. the Sharpe ratio, the Sortino ratio, the Calmar ratio, and
the Sterling ratio). The Sharpe ratio is widely used and it was developed based on mean-variance optimization; therefore, its risk
measure is the standard deviation of returns. The Sortino ratio
uses the downside deviation and it includes a target for the investment return. The Sterling ratio is used by Moody and Saffell
(2001) where the authors differentiated the Sterling ratio using
an exponential moving average. Our deﬁnition of the Calmar ratio includes the expected maximum drawdown which is deﬁned
by Magdon-Ismail and Atiya (2004), while the basic deﬁnition of
the Calmar ratio is similar to the Sterling ratio in that both use
the maximum drawdown. The issue here is that the Sterling ratio
is purely empirical, depending on the dataset it is applied to, and
lacking the analytical properties needed in RRL. We choose to use
the Calmar ratio deﬁned using the expected maximum drawdown
because it is consistent, coherent and differentiable by deﬁnition
as it can be seen from the deﬁnition of the expected maximum
drawdown. The relation between the Sharpe and Calmar ratios is
shown in Figs. 2 and 3. While Fig. 2 shows the relation between
the Sharpe ratio and the expected maximum drawdown per standard deviation unit, Fig. 3 shows the relation between the Calmar
ratio with different Sharpe ratio values and a moving time step.
From this construction, the Calmar ratio we use here is consistent
with Sharpe ratio in a nonlinear way, and it is a statistically coher-

270

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

CT =

T
Shr p2
2
T
Q p 2 Shr p2

(

T →∞

)

→

T Shr p2
0.63519 + 0.5 log T + log Shr p

where CT is the Calmar ratio over the time horizon T, E(MDD) is
the expected maximum drawdown. The functions Qn (x) and Qp (x)
are complicated integral expansions that do not have a convenient
analytical form and they are independent from γ , σ and T. Their
forms can be found in Magdon-Ismail et al. (2003) and in Pratap
(2004). γ is the mean of the returns and σ is the standard deviaγ
tion of returns, Shr p = σ .
Next, we construct a variable weight portfolio with a reinforcement learning signal. Let Ft ∈ {−1, 1} be the trading signal with
only two values. For Ft > 0, the investor would take a long position, and we set Ft = 1. For Ft < 0, the investor would then take
a short position, and we set Ft = −1. θ are the parameters that we
want to train θ ∈ M+2 where M is the time series that we want
to trade in. xt is a vector where xt = [1; rt . . . rt−M ; Ft−1 ], rt is the
log return rt = log( pricet ) − log( pricet−1 ). We calculate the return
at time t of our position in Eq. (3):

Rt = μ ∗ [Ft−1 · rt − δ|Ft − Ft−1 |]

Fig. 2. E(MDD) per unit σ vs. the Sharpe ratio.

(3)

μ is the number of shares that is a constant number and it can be
the maximum number of shares one can trade. δ is the transaction
cost and it is also a constant. Using a risk adjusted measure we
will maximize the Sharpe ratio in Eq. (4):

ST =

E[Rt ]

(4)

σ

where E[Rt ] is the mean of the return and σ is the standard deviation of the returns. The objective function is the deferential of the
Sharpe ratio and it is calculated by using the average of return and
standard deviation of the return. Using the chain rule we get Eq.
(5):

1
Rt
T
T

A=

t=1

1 2
Rt
T
T

B=

t=1


dST
=
dθ
T

t=1

Fig. 3. Scaling the Calmar ratio with time.

γT
E (MDD )

⎧ 2
2
T →∞ 2
2σ
Q ( γ T ) → σγ (0.63519
⎪
⎪
⎨ γ p 2σ 2
γ
+0.5 log T
ifγ > 0
√+ log σ )
E (MDD ) =
1
.
2533
σ
T
ifγ = 0
⎪
⎪
⎩ −2σ 2
2
γ 2 T T →∞
σ
ifγ < 0
γ Qn ( 2σ 2 ) → −γ T − γ

dST dA
dST dB
dR dF
dRt dFt−1
+
}·{ t t +
dA dRt
dB dRt
dFt dθ
dFt−1 dθ


(5)

where we have:

ent risk measure as the Sharpe ratio. Its long-term difference from
the Sharpe ratio is evident (see Fig. 3).
The Calmar ratio (CR) is similar to the Sharpe ratio (SR) in that
it is also a risk adjusted measure of performance. However, it is
an MDD risk metric that measures the maximum cumulative loss
from a peak to a following bottom. When the downside losses are
considered rather than the average deviation from mean return,
the trading decisions will certainly be different. Here we derive reward based on this E(MDD) risk based measure, the Calmar ratio.
We use the deferential of the Calmar ratio as our objective function:

CT =



(2)

dRt
= −μδ · sgn(Ft − Ft−1 )
dFt
dRt
= −μ · rt + μδ.sgn(Ft − Ft−1 )
dFt−1
dFt
= (1 − tanh(xt θ )2 ) ·
dθ

xt + θ M+2

dFt−1
dθ

The above equations conclude that

dFt
dθ

is recurrent, and the

weights are updated by the gradient ascent θi+1 = θi + ρ . dθT , and
ρ is the learning rate. The recurrent reinforcement learning can be
used to optimize a variable weight portfolio. First we change Eq.
(1) for each asset to Eq. (6):

fit = logsig(xit θ i )

dS

(6)

where fit is the action on asset i at time t, and logsig is the logsigmoid transfer function. This then leads to the following equation:

dFt
= (1 − logsig(xt θ )2 ) ·
dθ

xt + θ M+2

dFt−1
dθ

(7)

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

For a long only portfolio with variable weights, Eq. (8) needs to be
applied for each asset:

Fit = softmax( fit )

(8)

where the softmax function is applied to the actions on all the assets. It will assign weights to each asset and it already includes
the constraint ni Fit = 1, where n is the number of assets in the
portfolio.
The decisions from training the parameters θ with a logsig activation function will result in the choice of a number in the interval [0, 1] using a log − sigmoid function. The softmax function is
applied to all the assets decision at time t, and it will distribute asset allocation weights and assign the highest weight to the largest
asset decision and redistribute the weights from high to low according to the decision obtained from the logsig activation function. In our case, the portfolio will act closely to the equal weight
portfolio except if a decision on an asset is close to zero, then the
softmax will redistribute the weight among the other assets so we
are switching the weights between the assets as we move forward
with decisions. The softmax function is recommended for a portfolio as discussed in Moody et al. (1998). Here we are deﬁning clearly
fit and we are using the softmax out of the training model. The
training and the initial decision are based on the logsig function
within the model. This model is sensitive to the number of assets
as with more assets this model will act as an asset selector by assigning variable weights. Due to the similar statistical properties as
the Sharpe ratio, the Calmar ratio based recurrent reinforcement
learning as an objective function will be similar but substitute ST
with CT in Eqs. (4) and (5) accordingly.
3.2. Portfolio constraints
In portfolio optimization, practitioners consider some of the
real world constraints in their optimization process such as cardinality constraint, ﬂoor and ceiling constraint, round-lot constraint, pre-assignment constraint and class constraint. The cardinality constraint is used to limit the asset selection in the portfolio to a K number of assets. The ﬂoor and ceiling constraints limit
the weight of each asset allocation to certain boundaries. The preassignment constraint allows the investor to pre-select a desired
asset in the portfolio. The round-lot constraint restricts the number of any asset to an exact multiple of the normal trading lots.
The class constraint limits the proportion invested in assets with
common characteristics. In Chang, Meade, Beasley, and Sharaiha
(20 0 0), the authors proposed three meta-heuristic algorithms (genetic algorithm, simulated annealing, and particle swarm) to solve
the portfolio constraint problems.
Many scholars followed Chang et al. (20 0 0) and developed
meta-heuristic methods to solve the constrained portfolio optimization problems. Lwin, Qu, and Kendall (2014) developed a
learning guided multi-objective evolutionary algorithm to solve
the portfolio optimization problem with the cardinality constraint,
ﬂoor and ceiling constraint, pre-assignment constraint and roundlot constraint. The authors discussed that these constraints are
hard to satisfy at any time as the cardinality constraint by-itself
is a mixed quadratic integer NP-hard problem and the portfolio
selection with round-lot constraint is an NP-complete problem.
The authors compared the performance of their proposed algorithm with four different well-known multi-objective evolutionary
algorithms (the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm(NSGAII), the Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm(SPEA-2), Pareto
Envelope-based Selection Algorithm(PESA-II), Pareto Archived Evolution Strategy(PAES)). The proposed method is computationally efﬁcient and yields a better result over all the four algorithms. In
a paper by Silva, Neves, and Horta (2015), the authors solved the
constrained portfolio optimization problem with cardinality con-

271

straint, quantity constraint, long only constraint and transaction
cost constraint by combining multi-objective evolutionary (MOEA)
algorithm with technical indicators, where the indicators are determined by the MOEA algorithm and the selection method is adaptive as the stocks selected are changing with time. The stocks
are selected using fundamental indicators, and the trading decisions are based on technical indicators. During the testing phase on
the S&P 500 stocks, the authors included a 2% of the stock value
as a transaction cost. The proposed method outperforms the index in terms of returns and variance. Liagkouras and Metaxiotis
(2016) suggested that due to the intrinsic multi-objective nature of
the constrained portfolio optimization problem, the multi-objective
evolutionary algorithms proved to be very useful and effective in
handling the diﬃculties imposed by the problem in a reasonable
time. Chen, Lin, Zeng, Xu, and Zhang (2017) discussed the exact
algorithms for solving the constrained portfolio optimization problem where they mentioned that the disadvantage of the exact algorithm is that it always needs more computational time and can
ﬁnd an optimal solution only in a speciﬁed time. The authors then
presented a heuristic approach which is an extension to the Nondominated Sorting and Local Search (NSLS) based multi-objective
evolutionary framework and called it (e-NSLS) in order to solve the
cardinality constrained portfolio optimization problem. They compared their method with ﬁve different algorithms (NSGA-II, SPEA-2,
MOEA/D-DE, ABC-FC, GRASP-QUAD) and showed that the proposed
method outperforms the other ﬁve algorithms in computational results. Moreover, the authors used the Wilcoxon signed ranks test
analysis to statistically test the signiﬁcant performance of e-NSLS
with the other algorithms where the results show that the proposed method outperformed the other algorithms.
Although these constrained portfolio optimization problems are
complex and hard to solve (Chang et al., 20 0 0; Moral-Escudero,
Ruiz-Torrubiano, & Suárez, 2006), there exist a number of heuristic
search based approaches in the current literature to help practitioners to address their speciﬁc needs. In this paper, we primarily
focus on developing an effective RRL trading strategy and a trading system using different objective functions in a dynamic portfolio optimization setting. We will direct our attention in an unconstrained problem setting in the present study, and yet we do not
foresee major diﬃculties to combine our proposed approach with
the exiting heuristic portfolio constraint methods to address speciﬁc practical requirements. In fact, one could replace the gradient
ascent search in the current RRL optimization with an evolutionary
algorithm using a desirable objective function (e.g. Sharpe ratio or
Calmar ratio) as the ﬁtness function to optimize portfolio weights
and constraints simultaneously. For future work, we will combine
evolutionary algorithms with our proposed Calmar RRL model to
investigate the beneﬁt of introducing various portfolio constraints.
3.3. Data collection
In this study, we construct a ﬁve asset portfolio using ﬁve of the
most commonly traded exchange-traded funds from different asset categories. These assets (identiﬁed by their ticker symbols and
fund names) are as follows:
IWD: iShares Russell 10 0 0 Value
IWC: iShares Micro-Cap
• SPY: SPDR S&P 500 ETF
• DEM: WisdomTree Emerging Markets High Dividend
• CLY: iShares 10+ Year Credit Bond
•
•

IWD ETF is an equity fund that holds mid and large-cap US
stocks. This ETF tracks the performance of the Russell 10 0 0 value
index. IWC ETF is a fund that seeks to correspond to the performance of the Russell micro-cap index. It consists of small cap US
based companies. SPY ETF tracks the S&P500 index. It represents

272

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279
Table 1
Statistical features of the ETFs.
Asset
name

Mean
of returns

Maximum
drawdown

Average
volume

IWD
IWC
SPY
DEM
CLY

0.0015
0.0014
0.0018
−0.0024
0.0 0 02

0.1996
0.2714
0.1744
0.5199
0.1602

2,355,230
55,670
78,605,495
315,405
185,953

all 500 stocks in the index and pays dividends on a quarterly basis. DEM ETF is a fund that tracks the price and yield of the WisdomTree emerging markets equity income index, and has an international geographical focus. The CLY ETF is a ﬁxed income asset
class that follows the investment results of an index consisting of
long-term US corporate bonds and dollar dominated bonds with
remaining maturities more than ten years. We extract the weekly
closing prices for each of ﬁve assets from Yahoo Finance using the
fetch function in MATLAB. The dates are from January 01, 2011
to December 31, 2015. We use three years of weekly returns for
training and two years for testing. Table 1 shows some statistical
features of the assets selected over the total time horizon of ﬁve
years.
4. Trading algorithms comparison
In this section, we ﬁrst compare the performance of three
performance ratios as three different objective functions for the
model. This will result in three trading algorithms producing different trading decisions for the same set of assets, and then we
can readily assess the merits of each performance ratio in generating trading signals. The resulting portfolio rebalancing methods
are: the Sharpe ratio RRL (SR-RRL), the Sterling ratio RRL (TR-RRL),
and the Calmar ratio RRL (CR-RRL).
We show the comparison between the portfolios formulated using recurrent reinforcement learning with the Sharpe ratio as the
objective function vs. the Calmar ratio as the objective function. In
addition, we compare the recurrent reinforcement learning based
portfolios with the buy-and-hold strategy as a baseline benchmark.
We use three years of weekly closing prices (January 01, 2011 - December 31, 2013) to train our θ for each asset, and two years of
weekly closing prices (January 01, 2014 - December 31, 2015) for
testing. The value of M is set to 104, the number of weeks in the
two years of testing data. In order to generate the signals and the
weights from the recurrent reinforcement learning model, we set
the number of evaluations for the tanh model to a maximum of
10,0 0 0 and for the logsig model to 500. The logsig model at this
stage is given a small alteration to the equally weighted portfolio
weights due to the number of assets.

In this model, the objective function that we need to optimize
is the Sharpe ratio. The Sharpe ratio is a performance measure that
can be maximized by maximizing the mean of the return of the
portfolio and minimizing the standard deviation of the return. In
the SR-RRL we are using the deferential of the Sharpe ratio that is
calculated by averaging the Sharpe ratio. The weights in the model
will be updated with respect to the gradient of the Sharpe ratio.
The standard deviation is used as a measure of volatility. The more
the mean returns of the portfolio vary, the higher the volatility. In
other words, the volatility will increase if the mean of the returns
is varying in a positive or negative direction.

1
(Rt − γ )2
T

n


|Fit wit | = 1

(10)

i

where i is the number of assets at time t.
In the combination of the above two portfolios, Ft in Eq. (10) is
the signal from Eq. (1) and wt is the weight from Eqs. (6) and
(8). We select four portfolios from the Markowitz eﬃcient frontier shown in Fig. 4 and the equally weighted buy & hold portfolio
to compare them with the different RRL portfolios. Fig. 5 shows
the SR-RRL equally weighted and variable weights portfolio compared in terms of cumulative returns with the four portfolios from
the eﬃcient frontier using Markowitz mean-variance optimization
namely (minimum variance, maximum return, maximum Sharpe
ratio and a Pareto optimal) and the buy & hold portfolio. Both of
the SR-RRL portfolios are outperformed by the Pareto optimal portfolio by the end of the investment horizon. In this test we choose
μ = 100 and δ = 0 bp which is one basis point per stock traded.
When examining the return per asset of the SR-equally weighted
long/short portfolio, it shows ﬂuctuation of the asset returns. Since
it is an equally weighted portfolio, the portfolio is affected by each
asset movement equally. The return per asset conclude that the
DEM ETF is drawing down our portfolio as it is the only asset that
has strong drawdowns within the portfolio. Fig. 6 shows the asset
returns in the buy & hold strategy, indicating that the DEM ETF
is causing sharp negative returns. By examining the return of each
asset in the SR-variable weights long/short portfolio we conclude
that the portfolio acts closely to the equally weighted portfolio.
Since it is based on the same signals, the minor changes are causing the portfolio to out-perform due to the higher weight of the
SPY ETF until week 40 and IWD ETF in weeks 40–100. It is placing less weight on CLY in weeks 60–80, which minimizes the loss
caused by the ETF.
4.2. Sterling ratio recurrent reinforcement learning portfolios

4.1. Sharpe ratio recurrent reinforcement learning portfolios

σ=

The standard deviation should not be the only measurement of the
risk of a given portfolio. For example, a fund accumulating a return
between 4% and 6% on average will have a lower standard deviation than a fund accumulating a return between 4% and 14% on
average. In a portfolio with different types of assets of different
volatilities, the Sharpe ratio will be a setback to the performance
of the portfolio and the decision making process.
We use the recurrent reinforcement learning method with the
deferential Sharpe ratio as the objective function to obtain two different portfolios: the Sharpe Ratio Equally Weighted (SR-RRL EW)
Long/Short (L/S) Portfolio, and the Sharpe Ratio Variable Weights
(SR-RRL VW) Long/Short (L/S) Portfolio.
We use Eq. (1) as the activation function to get the signals of
each asset over the training period, and we then use equal weights
and apply the signals to the equal weights. Let n = the number of
assets, and the weight w = 1/n for each asset. This results in:

TR-RRL is a model with the objective function as the differential
of the Sterling ratio introduced in Moody and Saffell (2001). The
output of the model produces trading decisions to maximize the
Sterling ration in Eq. (11). The change of the weights in the model
will be based on the gradient of the Sterling ratio. Let

TR =

γ

(11)

MDD

where TR is the Sterling ratio, γ is the mean of the return, and
MDD is the maximum drawdown. The deferential of the Sterling
ratio in Moody and Saffell (2001) is calculated empirically by using
the exponential moving average of the ratio. The maximum drawdown is calculated as follows in Eq. (12):

T

t=1

(9)

1
min[Rt , 0]2
T
T

MDDT =

t=1

(12)

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

273

Fig. 4. Eﬃcient frontier portfolios.

Fig. 5. Portfolio performance RRL with Sharpe ratio (104 weeks).

folios from the eﬃcient frontier and the buy & hold portfolio. The
TR-RRL portfolios outperform all the portfolios by the end of the
investment horizon, where μ = 100 and δ = 0bp.
4.3. Calmar ratio recurrent reinforcement learning portfolios

Fig. 6. Asset returns buy & hold strategy (104 weeks).

In order to train this model to have the same number of cycles
as the others, we need to choose a number close to zero (e.g.
0.0 0 01) to avoid division by zero during training when evaluating
the minimum of the return (Rt ) and zero. We developed two portfolios: the Sterling Ratio Equally Weighted (TR-RRL EW) Long/Short
(L/S) Portfolio, and the Sterling Ratio Variable Weight (TR-RRL VW)
Long/Short (L/S) Portfolio. In Fig. 7, the TR-RRL equally weighted
and variable weights portfolios are compared with the four port-

As in the previous experiment, the training set is three years of
weekly closing prices and the testing set is two years of weekly
closing prices. We use the Calmar ratio (deﬁned in Eq. (2)) instead of the Sharpe ratio to obtain the signals and weights of our
portfolios, and the objective function is the derivative of the Calmar ratio. The difference between the two objective functions is
that the Calmar ratio is more sensitive to extreme losses while the
Sharpe ratio considers average deviations. Our goal is to identify
whether the large losses would make differences in the dynamic
optimization process. Using the expected maximum drawdown in
the Calmar ratio allows us to increase the number of function evaluations to 10,0 0 0 because the expected maximum drawdown is
based on the mean and standard deviation of returns where by
deﬁnition the expected maximum drawdown will not cause a division by zero error. On the other hand, the basic Sterling ratio used
by Moody will stop at some point due to a division by zero error.
We need to use a number that is close to zero in the maximum
drawdown evaluation when computing the minimum of the return
(Rt ) and zero. In this experiment, we test the following two portfolios: the Calmar Ratio Equally Weighted (CR-RRL EW) Long/Short
(L/S) Portfolio, and the Calmar Ratio Variable Weights (CR-RRL VW)
Long/Short (L/S) Portfolio.
In Fig. 8, we show the performance of the portfolios developed
using the recurrent reinforcement learning and the differential Calmar ratio as the objective function where μ = 100 and δ = 0 bp.
Where the CR-RRL portfolio is compared with the four portfolios

274

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

Fig. 7. Portfolio performance RRL with Sterling ratio (104 weeks).

Fig. 8. Portfolio performance Calmar ratio RRL (104 weeks).

Table 2
Model training computation time using eight core processors, 8GB RAM, Windows-64bit, MATLAB.
Trading strategy

Computational time (HH:MM:SS)

SR-RRL
TR-RRL
CR-RRL

02:39:39
02:37:50
02:43:19

from the eﬃcient frontier and the buy & hold portfolio. The CRRRL portfolios are superior to the other portfolios over most of the
investment horizon till the end of the horizon.
In Table 2, we show the training computational time for each
model where we used a computer with multiple cores. The computational times are presented in the hour, minute, and second
format (HH:MM:SS). We observe that the differences between the
methods in terms of computational time is minimal where they
differ only in a few minutes. Nevertheless, the TR-RRL method
has the least computational training time and the CR-RRL method
has the longest training time, and the SR-RRL method sits in between the other two. Overall, the computational eﬃciency of all
the strategies are not too far apart from each other since they are
all based on the RRL method with the exception of the objective
function. The choosing of the objective function would affect the
calculation of the gradient and that would then affect the training
of the parameters. In the case that the objective function cannot be
increased in the direction of it’s gradient, the algorithm may stop
at a local maximum with no eﬃcient training of the parameters θ .

4.4. Transaction cost sensitivity analysis
It is well-established that when designing a realistic trading
system, one has to account for all transaction costs (Madhavan,
2002; Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, & Macskassy, 2008). Although prior
studies have conducted trading simulations, many neglect the inﬂuence of transaction costs. The primary reason for such omission
is due to the diﬃculty in estimating realistically different types of
transaction costs involved, and these costs most likely differ for
different asset classes and depend on many other market characteristics. In this section, we examine the impact of trading costs
on the proﬁtability of different portfolio strategies. Empirical evidence shows that the average round-trip trading cost of large-cap
stocks on NYSE is at least 20 bps (Chan & Lakonishok, 1997; Keim
& Madhavan, 1998; Mittermayer, 2004). In the cost sensitivity analysis, we applied one-way trading costs of 10, 15, 20, and 25 bps.
Even with realistic transaction costs of 10 bps per round-trip, the
portfolio strategies are superior to the hedge fund industry index
performance. For transaction costs of 15 bps, the Calmar ratio RRL
strategy is on average still proﬁtable, but sustains a substantial loss
potential. In general, these strategies cannot compensate transaction costs of more than 20 bps. It requires a system level design
to accommodate high transaction costs and further improve portfolio performances, which we will discuss in the next section.
In Fig. 9, we compare the Calmar ratio RRL portfolios performance with the Sharpe ratio RRL portfolios. Due to transaction
costs, the Calmar ratio RRL outperforms the Sharpe ratio RRL in
terms of cumulative returns. We can conclude from the signals
generated that the Calmar ratio RRL portfolios are changing positions in some assets less frequently than the Sharpe ratio RRL
portfolios. This is clearer with the CLY ETF where the portfolio suf-

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

275

Fig. 9. Comparison in performance μ = 100, δ = 0 bp (104 weeeks).

Fig. 10. CLY ETF Signals generated from RRL-Calmar.

fers from losses due to transaction costs. The consistency in signals means that we are holding the asset at the same position for
a longer period of time which reduces the transaction cost. Figs. 10
and 11 show clearly the differences of signals generated for the CLY
ETF using the Calmar ratio and the Sharpe ratio, respectively. This
is reasonable because the Calmar ratio based objective function is
sensitive to large losses which occur less frequently than in the
Sharpe ratio. As a result, due to the frequent rebalancing signals
generated from Sharpe ratio objective function, transaction costs
are relatively higher compared with the Calmar ratio portfolios.
Table 3 shows the Sharpe ratio of each portfolio through backtesting with both the Sharpe ratio, Sterling ratio and the Calmar
ratio as objective functions. Overall, the Calmar ratio portfolios
outperform the Sharpe ratio and Sterling ratio portfolios consistently. When the transaction cost increases, the performance of
the Sharpe ratio based portfolios decreases, while the Calmar ratio based portfolios maintain almost the same performance (see
Tables 4 and 5). The Calmar ratio portfolios are actually increasing

in Sharpe ratio measure due to the fact that the transaction cost is
affecting the standard deviation of the returns more than the mean
of the returns due to the high returns generated by the portfolio with a low standard deviation. The Sterling ratio based portfolios perform between the Sharpe ratio and the Calmar ratio portfolios both with and without transaction costs. When the transaction
cost increases to 15 bps, both the Sharpe ratio and Sterling ratio
portfolios start to generate negative annualized returns. Under no
transaction cost, the Calmar ratio based portfolio retains high performance. Under a high transaction cost (δ = 20 bps), the Sharpe
ratio based portfolio suffers a large loss, while the Calmar ratio
based portfolios performance is impacted only by a slight decrease
in returns. In Section 5, we propose a stop-loss control to the system to limit the transaction cost effect (see Table 6).
5. Trading system and discussion
We develop an adaptive trading system based on the recurrent
reinforcement learning using three different objective functions.

276

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

Fig. 11. CLY ETF Signals generated from RRL-Sharpe.

Table 3
Long-short portfolio comparison with different learning objective functions. Note: EW and VW
represent Equally Weighted and Variable Weight strategies, respectively.
L/S portfolio
(δ = 0 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accumulative (annualized)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Sharpe ratio RRL EW
Sharpe ratio RRL VW

3.1229
2.7630

6.31 (3.11)
8.24 (4.04)

0.5080
0.4363

230
230

Sterling ratio RRL EW
Sterling ratio RRL VW

2.3780
2.2816

12.99 (6.29)
13.83 (6.69)

0.4699
0.5262

235
235

Calmar ratio RRL EW
Calmar ratio RRL VW

2.3245
2.1781

16.39 (7.88)
19.65 (9.39)

0.2721
0.2675

221
221

Table 4
Long-short portfolio comparison with different learning objective functions and transaction
costs (δ = 10 bps). Note: EW and VW represent Equally Weighted and Variable Weight strategies, respectively.
L/S portfolio
(δ = 10 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accumulative (annualized)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Sharpe ratio RRL EW
Sharpe ratio RRL VW

1.6926
2.0105

−2.77 (−1.39)
−1.55 (−0.78)

0.9771
0.8575

230
230

Sterling ratio RRL EW
Sterling ratio RRL VW

1.8071
1.5061

3.67 (1.82)
3.46 (1.71)

0.9968
1.0 0 0 0

235
235

Calmar ratio RRL EW
Calmar ratio RRL VW

2.5760
2.3367

7.63 (3.74)
9.75 (4.76)

0.4914
0.4692

221
221

Table 5
Long-short portfolio comparison with different learning objective functions and transaction
costs (δ = 15 bps). Note: EW and VW represent Equally Weighted and Variable Weight strategies, respectively.
L/S portfolio
(δ = 15 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accumulative (annualized)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Sharpe ratio RRL EW
Sharpe ratio RRL VW

0.4669
0.6165

−7.31 (−3.72)
−6.45 (−3.28)

0.9960
0.9878

230
230

Sterling ratio RRL EW
Sterling ratio RRL VW

0.3943
0.1044

−0.99 (−0.50)
−1.73 (−0.87)

0.9931
0.9769

235
235

Calmar ratio RRL EW
Calmar ratio RRL VW

2.6433
2.3925

3.25 (1.61)
4.79 (2.37)

0.7116
0.6619

221
221

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

277

Table 6
Long-short portfolio comparison with different learning objective functions and transaction
costs (δ = 20 bps). Note: EW and VW represent Equally Weighted and Variable Weight strategies, respectively.
L/S portfolio
(δ = 20 bp)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accumulative (annualized)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Sharpe ratio RRL EW
Sharpe ratio RRL VW

−0.2281
−0.2551

−11.85 (−6.11)
−11.35 (−5.84)

0.9661
0.9630

230
230

Sterling ratio RRL EW
Sterling ratio RRL VW

−0.5334
−0.7198

−5.65 (−2.87)
−6.91 (−3.52)

0.9973
0.9869

235
235

Calmar ratio RRL EW
Calmar ratio RRL VW

2.1424
2.1320

−1.13 (−0.57)
−0.16 (−0.08)

0.8966
0.9990

221
221

Fig. 12. RRL based trading decision system.

The recurrent reinforcement learning system is a recursive learning system, where the system learns from every output every time
step. In this system, the trader can select an objective function that
would be the best for the assets of his portfolio. The system parameters are trained based on the objective function desired. We
have introduced three objective functions and showed the difference based on a portfolio of ﬁve commonly traded ETFs. In a paper
by DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009), the authors showed that
an equally weighted portfolio can be an eﬃcient portfolio and they
compared it to other strategies. In our trading system the default
choice of the portfolio weights is the equally weighted portfolio.
In Fig. 12, we show the design of the trading system where the
user will select the objective function (the Sharpe Ratio, the Calmar Ratio, and the Sterling Ratio) that the RRL system will maximize, and the assets along with the time frame T of the prices. The
user will also select the number of decision steps M where M < T.
The data of the assets will be gathered from Yahoo Finance. The
RRL system will learn and train the parameters using the historical
returns of time T. After training, the system will allow the user to
deﬁne the asset allocation from two types of strategic asset allocation (Equally Weighted Portfolio (default), RRL Deﬁned Portfolio).
The RRL system will output the long and short decisions of each
asset along with the strategic allocation. The system will ask the
investor if he would like to use the dynamic stop-loss exit strategy
which will stop the trading and go to retraining the system again.
If the investor does not want to use the stop-loss then the output
will be stored for the next use of the system where it will continue
to learn from the given outputs. The system is trained with a predeﬁned transaction cost of δ = 10 bps per share and μ = 100 with

Table 7
Portfolio comparison with hedge funds and buy & hold strategy.
Portfolio

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
Accu. (Ann.)

Maximum
drawdown

Calmar ratio RRL VW
SRUSOGP
HFRIEHI
Buy & hold

1.93
1.71
1.17
0.62

28.6 (13.4)
9.29 (4.54)
0.82 (0.41)
−5.25 (−2.66)

0.1474
0.7384
0.8745
0.9728

no stop-loss during the training phase. In a real trading system, the
investor would be able to estimate their transaction costs based on
their past trading records, and these costs can change from period
to period on the same set of assets. The proposed system will then
be able to adapt to these changes through retraining the system
with a new cost estimation. The system recommends that the user
utilize the Calmar ratio as the objective function when δ ≥ 15bps
per share, where using this objective function will help the system
endure the transaction cost effect. Also, if the investor is concerned
about the drawdown of the portfolio, the Calmar ratio is perfect
due to the fact that the system will be trained to minimize the
expected maximum drawdown.
In Fig. 13, we compare the performance of the CR-RRL variable
weights (L/S) portfolio with Hedge Fund Research’s HFRI Equity
Hedge Index (HFRIEHI) and Sunrise’s U.S. Equity Optimized Growth
Program (SGUSOGP) hedge fund, on a monthly basis over two
years (2014–2015) with δ = 1 bp and μ = 100. Table 7 shows the
comparison in performance between the CR-RRL variable weights
long/short portfolio, the HFRI Equity Hedge Index, and the Sunrise

278

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

Fig. 13. CR-RRL variable weights portfolio vs. hedge funds (24 months).

Fig. 14. CR-RRL variable weightes with stop-loss (104 weeks).

U.S. equity hedge fund. This table shows that the CR-RRL portfolio
is outperforming in terms of Sharpe ratio, annualized return and
maximum drawdown. In this comparison, we highlight the performance of the Calmar ratio RRL system for investors’ portfolio designs.
5.1. Dynamic stop−loss strategy
The stop-loss strategy used in the RRL trading decision system is a simple dynamic stop-loss strategy. The notion of the simple dynamic stop-loss is introduced by Chevallier, Ding, and Ielpo
(2012) where they applied it to a long-only portfolio. Here we apply the concept in our trading system using the cumulative return
in Eq. (13):

rt−1

σt−1

≤ −n

(13)

where rt−1 is the cumulative return up to time t − 1, σt−1 is the
moving volatility up to time t − 1, and n is the number of volatility days prompting stop-loss. The stop-loss is applied only during
the testing phase at the decision making process; it is not used
for training the parameters of the recurrent reinforcement learning model. In Fig. 14, we show the stop-loss strategy effect on
returns of the CR-RRL portfolio where the CR-RRL portfolio with
stop-loss exits the market in week 91 and stops trading. The system will retrain the parameters based on the latest market movements. In Table 8, we show the Sharpe ratio with a stop-loss for
CR-RRL equally weighted portfolio with different transactions costs
compared.

Table 8
Calmar ratio recurrent reinforcement learning (CR-RRL) portfolio comparison with/without stop-loss and different transaction costs (δ ).
Portfolio
(δ = 0 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accu. (ann.)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Stop-Loss
No Stop-Loss

1.9915
2.1781

29.65 (13.87)
19.65 (9.39)

0.2279
0.2675

230
221

Portfolio
(δ = 10 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accu. (ann.)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Stop-Loss
No Stop-Loss

2.0852
2.3367

19.27 (9.21)
9.75 (4.76)

0.3628
0.4692

230
221

Portfolio
(δ = 15 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accu. (ann.)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Stop-Loss
No Stop-Loss

2.1752
2.3925

14.08 (6.81)
4.79 (2.37)

0.5083
0.6619

230
221

Portfolio
(δ = 20 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accu. (ann.)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Stop-Loss
No Stop-Loss

2.2958
2.1320

8.90 (4.35)
-0.16 (-0.08)

0.7844
0.9990

230
221

Portfolio
(δ = 25 bps)

Sharpe
ratio

Return (%)
accu. (ann.)

Maximum
drawdown

Num.
of trades

Stop-Loss
No Stop-Loss

2.1382
1.0273

3.71 (1.84)
−5.11 (−2.59)

0.9550
0.9550

230
221

From Table 8, we see that the stop-loss will be able to make
the portfolio endure higher transaction costs in the case that δ ≥
25 bps as the stop-loss strategy will exit the market when the
volatility is high, and retrain the parameters of the model, and
then generate new signals to reenter the market. The training of

S. Almahdi, S.Y. Yang / Expert Systems With Applications 87 (2017) 267–279

the new parameters will be done using the latest returns until the
exit point to handle changing market conditions.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we use the recurrent reinforcement learning
method to solve a dynamic portfolio optimization problem where
we develop four portfolios using the RRL and compare them with
each other and the buy & hold portfolio. We use RRL methods to
optimize the portfolio weights and rebalance the portfolio over a
predeﬁned time horizon. We compare the deferential of the Sharpe
ratio and the Calmar ratio as the objective functions in the recurrent reinforcement learning process and examine the performance
effect by the transaction costs. We compare the performance differences between the Sterling ratio proposed by Moody and Saffell (2001) where they deﬁned the downside risk as an exponential moving average of drawdown. Due to its lack of necessary statistical properties, the Sterling ratio based RRL suffers computational breakdowns during the optimization process. More importantly, it neutralizes the downside risks and therefore it is limited in reaching an optimal trading strategy. Through backtesting
of the constructed portfolio using ETFs, we conclude that: a) variable weight long/short portfolios outperform the equally weighted
long/short portfolios; b) the RRL Calmar ratio based portfolios outperform the RRL Sharpe ratio based portfolios consistently; c) the
E(MDD) RRL based trading system with market condition stop-loss
retraining responds to transaction cost effects better and outperforms hedge fund benchmarks consistently. Overall, we show that
the portfolios constructed using RRL with the expected maximum
drawdown based Calmar ratio result in a signiﬁcantly superior performance and are more transaction cost resilient than the portfolios constructed with the Sharpe ratio.
In addition, we propose an adaptive trading decision system
based on the proposed RRL portfolio rebalance strategies with both
transaction costs and market condition changes, and we show that
the system consistently outperforms the benchmark and hedge
fund industry average index. We speciﬁcally demonstrate how this
expected maximum drawdown based reinforcement learning approach can ﬁlter market noise and identify the signiﬁcant trading
signals, and how the trading decision system with transaction cost
and stop-loss retraining can adapt to different market conditions.
For future studies, we plan to deﬁne a relative strength performance measure using the expected maximum drawdown to minimize tracking errors with respect to certain benchmarks. We also
believe that logsig, softmax RRL model can be extended by adding
layers to the model in order to help make a good variable weight
decision. The Calmar ratio using the expected maximum drawdown can be applied in other reinforcement learning models and
on a large set of asset classes.
References
Beraldi, P., Violi, A., & De Simone, F. (2011). A decision support system for strategic
asset allocation. Decision Support Systems, 51(3), 549–561.
Bertoluzzo, F., & Corazza, M. (2008). Financial trading systems: Is recurrent reinforcement learning the way? In Reﬂexing interfaces: The complex coevolution of
information technology ecosystems (pp. 246–256). IGI Global.
Bertsekas, D. P. (1995). Dynamic programming and optimal control: 1. Athena Scientiﬁc Belmont, MA.
Bhansali, V. (2007). Putting economics (back) into quantitative models. The Journal
of Portfolio Management, 33(3), 63–76.
Cavalcante, R. C., Brasileiro, R. C., Souza, V. L., Nobrega, J. P., & Oliveira, A. L. (2016).
Computational intelligence and ﬁnancial markets: A survey and future directions. Expert Systems with Applications, 55, 194–211.
Chan, L. K. C., & Lakonishok, J. (1997). Institutional equity trading costs: NYSE versus
nasdaq. The Journal of Finance, 52(2), 713–735.
Chande, T. S. (2001). Beyond technical analysis: How to develop and implement a winning trading system: 101. John Wiley & Sons.
Chang, T.-J., Meade, N., Beasley, J. E., & Sharaiha, Y. M. (20 0 0). Heuristics for cardinality constrained portfolio optimisation. Computers & Operations Research,
27(13), 1271–1302.

279

Chen, B., Lin, Y., Zeng, W., Xu, H., & Zhang, D. (2017). The mean-variance cardinality
constrained portfolio optimization problem using a local search-based multi-objective evolutionary algorithm. Applied Intelligence, 1–21.
Chevallier, J., Ding, W., & Ielpo, F. (2012). Implementing a simple rule for dynamic
stop-loss strategies. The Journal of Investing, 21(4), 111–114.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., & Uppal, R. (2009). Optimal versus naive diversiﬁcation:
How ineﬃcient is the 1/n portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies, 22(5),
1915–1953.
Dempster, M. A., & Leemans, V. (2006). An automated fx trading system using adaptive reinforcement learning. Expert Systems with Applications, 30(3), 543–552.
Eilers, D., Dunis, C. L., von Mettenheim, H.-J., & Breitner, M. H. (2014). Intelligent
trading of seasonal effects: A decision support algorithm based on reinforcement learning. Decision Support Systems, 64, 100–108.
Feuerriegel, S., & Prendinger, H. (2016). News-based trading strategies. Decision Support Systems, 90, 65–74.
Gold, C. (2003a). Fx trading via recurrent reinforcement learning. In Computational
intelligence for ﬁnancial engineering, 2003. proceedings. 2003 IEEE international
conference on (pp. 363–370). IEEE.
Gold, C. (2003b). FX trading via recurrent reinforcement learning. In IEEE/IAFE conference on computational intelligence for ﬁnancial engineering, proceedings (cifer):
2003 (pp. 363–370).
Gorse, D. (2010). Application of stochastic recurrent reinforcement learning to index
trading. In ESANN 2011 proceedings, 19th European symposium on artiﬁcial neural
networks, computational intelligence and machine learning (pp. 123–128).
Hens, T., & Wöhrmann, P. (2007). Strategic asset allocation and market timing: A
reinforcement learning approach. Computational Economics, 29(3-4), 369–381.
Keim, D. B., & Madhavan, A. (1998). The cost of institutional equity trades. Financial
Analysts Journal, 54(4), 50–69.
Liagkouras, K., & Metaxiotis, K. (2016). A new eﬃciently encoded multiobjective algorithm for the solution of the cardinality constrained portfolio optimization
problem. Annals of Operations Research, 1–39.
Lwin, K., Qu, R., & Kendall, G. (2014). A learning-guided multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for constrained portfolio optimization. Applied Soft Computing, 24,
757–772.
Madhavan, A. N. (2002). Implementation of hedge fund strategies. Special Issues
(Hedge Fund Strategies), 2002(1), 74–80.
Magdon-Ismail, M., Atiya, A., Pratap, A., & Abu-Mostafa, Y. (2003). The maximum
drawdown of the brownian motion. In Computational intelligence for ﬁnancial engineering, 2003. proceedings. 2003 IEEE international conference on (pp. 243–247).
IEEE.
Magdon-Ismail, M., & Atiya, A. F. (2004). Maximum drawdown. Risk Magazine,
17(10), 99–102.
Maringer, D., & Ramtohul, T. (2010). Threshold recurrent reinforcement learning
model for automated trading. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),
6025 LNCS(PART 2), 212–221.
Maringer, D., & Ramtohul, T. (2012). Regime-switching recurrent reinforcement
learning for investment decision making. Computational Management Science,
9(1), 89–107.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7(1), 77–91.
Martinez, L. C., da Hora, D. N., Palotti, J. R. d. M., Meira, W., & Pappa, G. L. (2009).
From an artiﬁcial neural network to a stock market day-trading system: A case
study on the bm&f bovespa. In Neural networks, 2009. IJCNN 2009. international
joint conference on (pp. 2006–2013). IEEE.
Mittermayer, M.-A. (2004). Forecasting intraday stock price trends with text mining techniques. In system sciences, 2004. proceedings of the 37th annual hawaii
international conference on (pp. 10–pp). IEEE.
Moody, J., & Saffell, M. (2001). Learning to trade via direct reinforcement. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 12(4), 875–889.
Moody, J., Wu, L., Liao, Y., & Saffell, M. (1998). Performance functions and reinforcement learning for trading systems and portfolios. Science, 17(February 1997),
441–470.
Moral-Escudero, R., Ruiz-Torrubiano, R., & Suárez, A. (2006). Selection of optimal
investment portfolios with cardinality constraints. In Evolutionary computation,
2006. CEC 2006. IEEE congress on (pp. 2382–2388). IEEE.
Pratap, A. (2004). Maximum drawdown of a Brownian motion and AlphaBoost: a
boosting algorithm. California Institute of Technology Ph.D. thesis..
Pu, Q., Ananthanarayanan, G., Bodik, P., Kandula, S., Akella, A., Bahl, P., . . . Schmidhuber, J. (2016). Using a genetic algorithm to improve recurrent reinforcement
learning for equity trading. Computational Economics, 47(4), 421–434.
Silva, A., Neves, R., & Horta, N. (2015). A hybrid approach to portfolio composition
based on fundamental and technical indicators. Expert Systems with Applications,
42(4), 2036–2048.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An introduction: 1. MIT
press Cambridge.
Sutton, R. S., Barto, A. G., & Williams, R. J. (1992). Reinforcement learning is direct
adaptive optimal control. IEEE Control Systems, 12(2), 19–22.
Tan, Z., Quek, C., & Cheng, P. Y. (2011). Stock trading with cycles: A ﬁnancial application of anﬁs and reinforcement learning. Expert Systems with Applications,
38(5), 4741–4755.
Tetlock, P. C., Saar-Tsechansky, M., & Macskassy, S. (2008). More than words: Quantifying language to measure ﬁrms’ fundamentals. The Journal of Finance, 63(3),
1437–1467.
Zimmermann, H., Drobetz, W., & Oertmann, P. (2003). Global asset allocation: New
methods and applications: 197. John Wiley & Sons.

